---
# layout: post
title: My 2021 Annual Review
date: 2021-12-31
permalink: /review2021/
tags:
  - Annual Review
---


Learning from the Atomic Habit author [James Clear](https://jamesclear.com/2019-annual-review), I plan to write an annual review this year to answer three questions.

1. What went well this year?
1. What didn’t go so well this year?
1. What did I learn? 

# 1. What went well this year?

## Life

- I celebrate my 36th birthday this year. My father passed away in a motor cycle accident in May 1999. His life stopped at age 35.5 before he could celebrate the 36th birthday. Therefore, the 36th birthday has always been a milestone in my mind. I am glad that I was able to celebrate it. Many times I wonder if my dad would be proud of me were he still alive. I hope to be alive long enough so that my kids won't have this lingering question.

## Work

- **2 papers accepted for publication.** One for Journal of the Association for Information Systems in January and the other for MIS Quarterly in December. 

- **Faculty Success Program training.** My school paid for this 12-week program that cost $4500. The goal of the program is to improve research productivity and life balance. I learned a lot from this program including time management, saying no, prioritize projects, finding mentors.  

- I won the **Teacher of the Month** for Ivy College of Business in November. 

## Reading

- [31 books](https://www.goodreads.com/user_challenges/25513643) read this year. Out of these 31, there are 5 that I highly recommend. 

    1. The School of Life: An Emotional Education by Alain de Botton
    2. 1000 Years of Joys and Sorrows by Ai Weiwei
    3. The War of Art by Steven Pressfield
    4. Open by Andre Agassi
    5. Atomic Habits by James Clear


## Travel

- Family vacation in Florida in May to celebrate my elder son's birthday. Legoland, Universal studio, Gatorland are a lot of fun. 

- Family vacation in Dallas and Austin in December. It's nice to be back in Texas. During the 6 years (2012–2018) in Dallas, we've never been to Austin. Fortunately, this year's annual conference for our area is in Austin, Texas. We grabbed this chance to visit Austin. We also drove to Dallas to visit several friends and to enjoy so many restaurants (Haidilao Hot Pot in Frisco is our favorite place for this trip).

- Trip to Boston in October for the 2021 Boston Marathon. 

## Running

- [365 days of running](https://www.strava.com/athletes/12995121/posts/19159354) this year. 2361 miles covered in this year. The distance is 330 miles short of the road distance from Ames, Iowa to Cancun, Mexico. I guess I need to run more next year.

- In [Boston Marathon 2021](https://boston.r.mikatiming.com/2021/?content=detail&fpid=search&pid=search&idp=9TGHS6FF144A69&lang=EN_CAP&event=R&event_main_group=runner&pidp=start&search%5Bname%5D=Nie&search%5Bfirstname%5D=Cheng&search_event=R#), I ran my personal record of 2 hours and 46 minutes for a full marathon. 

# 2. What didn't go so well this year?

- **8-hour sleep.** I aim at getting 8 hours of sleep every day. However, once I start using the computer in the evening, I could cut 1 to 3 hours from my 8-hour sleeping time. This is something I will work on in the new year. 

- **Daily meditation.** I used to do 1-hour per day vipassana meditation. Similar to cutting the sleeping time, I cut the meditation time this year as well. The cut has some negative impacts on my life. First of all, it's hard to put those anxious thoughts at bay if I woke up during my sleep. Second, I tend to be distracted by thoughts and urges during the day. 

- **Addiction to dopamine rush.** Life can be boring, therefore, there are so many products that I tend to use to kill time. Among all my time sinks, the biggest category is social media including Youtube, Facebook, Wechat. 

- **Sick quite a few times.**
    - I experienced migraine symptoms during the Florida trip in May. The flight was delayed 8 hours and I was sleep deprived when we arrive at Florida 3 am. 
    - 5 rounds of cold from August to December. 
    - Shingles in October. 

# 3. What did I learn?. 

- **I don't have to like research to be a productive researcher.** Even Andre Agassi hates tennis! But that does not stope him from earning all those grand slams. I used to have unrealistic expectations about research: I have to love research to be able to work on it. When I don't seem to find the love, I tend to digress to social media. What I learned is that: this is a typical symptom of procrastination by denial. By denying the meaning of what I am working on, I give myself excuses not to work on it. 

- **Keep my office door open when I work at school.** It is a commitment device that help me stay focused on my work. Because it would be embarrassing for my colleagues to find me watching funny cat videos in my office. 

- **Talk to mentor really helps.** It's the same reason why counselling helps. You might have noticed how easy it is to find problems in other people's lives. Therefore, talking to your mentor and your counsellor would give them chances to find the problems in your own life. Even better, those counsellors and mentors are people who you trust. They would help you come up with constructive plans so that you will make fewer mistakes and avoid common pitfalls. By talking to my mentor, I found out some of the projects I spent time on were hopeless. The  conversation helped me prioritize what I should be focusing on in my research. Also through my mentor, I understand the papers I publish also appreciate in value just like those investment houses. 

- **Setting realistic goals.** I used to think that I can spend 5 hours on research 6 days a week. It creates a lot of trouble for me. Sometimes, I have the self-sabotage routine of starting a day with social media. When I realize that I won't be able to spend 5 hours on research that day anyway, I would give up that goal and do whatever I like. In addition, during those productive days when I did log 4.5 hours on research, I still feel like a failure since I did not achieve that 5-hour goal. Planning my week ahead by marking my calendars was very helpful for me to stay realistic. By reserving those time slots (for research, teaching, family time, etc) help me stay committed to what I want to achieve. 