---
title: Wild Swans - by Jung Chang
date: 2025-02-16
permalink: /notes/wild-swans
author_profile: false
tags:
    - notes
---

## *Wild Swans* - by Jung Chang

Read: 2025-02-16

Recommend: 10/10

It is unsurprising that this book has been banned in China. The thoroughness with which Jung Chang approached the narrative is commendable. Her detailed examination serves to illustrate the detrimental effects of dictatorship on human societies.


## Notes

**Here are some text that I highlighted in the book:** 

1. But her greatest assets were her bound feet, called in Chinese 'three-inch golden lilies' (san-tsun-gin-lian).  This meant she walked 'like a tender young willow shoot in a spring breeze," as Chinese connoisseurs of women traditionally put it.  The sight of a woman teetering on bound feet was supposed to have an erotic effect on men, partly because her vulnerability induced a feeling of protectiveness in the onlooker.

1.  In the house of a potentate like General Xue, the women were virtual prisoners, living in a state of permanent squabbling and bickering, largely induced by insecurity.  The only security they had was their husband's favor.

1. What hurt Dr. Xia more was the emotional blackmail especially the argument that taking an ex-concubine as a proper wife would affect his children's position in society.  He knew his children would lose face, and he felt guilty about this. But Dr. Xia felt he had to put my grandmother's happiness first.  If he took her as a concubine, she would not merely lose face, she would become the slave of the whole family.  His love alone would not be enough to protect her if she was not his proper wife.  Dr. Xia implored his family to grant an old man's wish.  But they and society took the attitude that an irresponsible wish should not be indulged.  Some hinted that he was senile.  Others told him: "You already have sons, grandsons, and even a great-grandson, a big and prosperous family.  What more do you want?  Why do you have to marry her?" The arguments went on and on.  More and more relatives and friends appeared on the scene, all invited by the sons.  They unanimously pronounced the marriage to be an insane idea.  Then they turned their venom against my grandmother.  "Marrying again when her late husband's body and bones are not yet cold!" "That woman has it all worked out: she is refusing to accept concubine status so that she can become a proper wife.  If she really loves you, why can't she be satisfied with being your concubine?" They attributed motives to my grandmother: she was scheming to get Dr. Xia to marry her, and would then take over the family and ill-treat his children and grandchildren.

1. A horse-drawn cart rushed him to a nearby hospital, where he died the next day.  He probably had not intended to kill himself, just to make a dramatic gesture so the pressure on his father would be irresistible.  His son's death devastated Dr. Xia.  Although outwardly he appeared calm as usual, people who knew him could see that his tranquillity had become scarred with a deep sadness.  From then on he was subject to bouts of melancholy, very much out of character with his previous imperturbability.  Yixian was boiling with indignafon, rumor, and accusations.  Dr. Xia and particularly my grandmother were made to feel responsible for the death.  Dr. Xia wanted to show he was not going to be deterred.  Soon after the funeral of his son, he fixed a date for the wedding.  He warned his children that they must pay due respect to their new mother, and sent out invitations to the leading townspeople.

1. He treated Japanese as well as locals.  Sometimes after treating a senior Japanese officer or a collaborator he would say, "I wish he were dead," but his personal views never affected his professional attitude.  "A patient is a human being," he used to say.  "That is all a doctor should think about.  He should not mind what kind of a human being he is."

1. Later on he learned that his daughter had been very well treated, and the 'woman comrade' turned out to be the wife of the Communist officer.  Policy toward prisoners was an intricate combination of political calculation and humanitarian consideration, and this was one of the crucial factors in the Communists' victory. Their goal was not just to crush the opposing army but, if possible, to bring about its disintegration. 

1. Another thing that captured the goodwill of the locals was the discipline of the Communist soldiers.  Not only was there no looting or rape, but many went out of their way to demonstrate exemplary behavior. This was in sharp contrast with the Kuomintang troops.

1. "Drawing a line' between people was a key mechanism the Communists introduced to increase the gap between those who were 'in' and those who were 'out."  Nothing, even personal relationships, was left to chance, or allowed to be fluid.  If she wanted to get married, she had to stop seeing her friends.

1. He told her that she must be strong, and that as a young student 'joining the revolution' she needed to 'go through the five mountain passes' which meant adopting a completely new attitude to family, profession, love, life-style, and manual labor, through embracing hardship and trauma.  The Party's theory was that educated people like her needed to stop being 'bourgeois' and become closer to the peasants, who formed over 8o percent of the population.  My mother had heard these theories a hundred times.  She accepted the need to reform oneself for a new China; in fact she had just written a poem about meeting the challenge of 'the storm of sand' in her future.  But she also wanted more tenderness and personal understanding, and she resented the fact that she did not get them from my father.

1.  The revolution was fundamentally a peasant revolution, and the peasants had an unrelentingly harsh life.  They were particularly sensitive about other people enjoying or seeking comfort. Anyone who took part in the revolution was supposed to toughen themselves to the point where they became inured to hardship.  My father had done this at Yan'an and as a guerrilla.

1. "Such a bourgeois waste!  Why can't she just wrap the baby up in old clothes like everyone else?"  The fact that my mother had shown her sadness that my grandmother had to leave was singled out as definitive proof that she 'put family first," a serious offense.

1. Meetings were an important means of Communist control.  They left people no free time, and eliminated the private sphere.  The pettiness which dominated them was justified on the grounds that prying into personal details was a way of ensuring thorough soul-cleansing.  In fact, pettiness was a fundamental characteristic of a revolution in which intrusiveness and ignorance were celebrated, and envy was incorporated into the system of control.  My mother's cell grilled her week after week, month after month, forcing her to produce endless self-criticisms.

1. Officials were supposed to work from 8 a.m. until 11 p.m., seven days a week, and one or both of them usually came home so late they hardly had time to talk to each other.  Their baby daughter did not live with them, and they ate in the canteen, so there was almost nothing one could call a home life.

1. Dr. Xia considered my father a very knowledgeable man.  He used to say he had seen many officials in the past, but never one like my father.  Common wisdom had it that 'there is no official who is not corrupt," but my father never abused his position, not even to look after the interests of his own family.  The two men would talk together for hours.  They shared many ethical values, but whereas my father's were dressed in the garb of an ideology, Dr. Xia's rested on a humanitarian foundation.  

1. "You don't have to help him, but you don't have to block him either!" My father said that his brother was not capable enough and that he would not have been put forward for promotion if he had not been the governor's brother.  There was a long tradition of anticipating the wishes of one's superiors, he pointed out.  The tea management board was indignant because my father's action implied that their recommendation had ulterior motives.  My father ended up offending everyone, and his brother never spoke to him again.  But my father was unrepentant.  He was fighting his own crusade against the old ways, and he insisted on treating everyone by the same criteria.  But there was no objective standard for fairness, so he relied on his own instincts, bending over backward to be fair.  He did not consult his colleagues, partly because he knew that none of them would ever tell him that a relative of his was undeserving.

1. A standard technique in China to bring a person down was to draw together several different charges to make the case appear more substantial.  

1. One day a peasant burst into his room and threw himself on the floor, screaming that he had committed a terrible crime and begging to be punished.  Eventually it came out that he had killed his own baby and eaten it.  Hunger had been like an uncontrollable force driving him to take up the knife.  With tears rolling down his cheeks, the official ordered the peasant to be arrested.  Later he was shot as a warning to baby killers.  One official explanation for the famine was that Khrushchev had suddenly forced China to pay back a large debt it had incurred during the Korean War in order to come to the aid of North Korea.  The regime played on the experience of much of the population, who had been landless peasants and could remember being hounded by heartless creditors to pay rent or reimburse loans.  By identifying the Soviet Union, Mao also created an external enemy to take the blame and to rally the population.  Another cause mentioned was 'unprecedented natural calamities."  China is a vast country, and bad weather causes food shortages somewhere every year.  No one but the highest leaders had access to nationwide information about the weather.  In fact, given the immobility of the population, few knew what happened in the next region, or even over the next mountain.  Many thought then, and still think today, that the famine was caused by natural disasters. I have no full picture, but of all the people I have talked to from different parts of China, few knew of natural calamities in their regions.  They only have stories to tell about deaths from starvation.  At a conference for 7,000 top-ranking officials at the beginning of 1962, Mao said that the famine was caused 70 percent by natural disasters and 30 percent by human error.  President Liu Shaoqi chipped in, apparently on the spur of the moment, that it was caused 30 percent by natural disasters and 70 percent by human error.  My father was at the conference, and when he returned he said to my mother: "I fear Comrade Shaoqi is going to be in trouble."

1. Throughout history Chinese scholars and mandarins had traditionally taken up fishing when they were disillusioned with what the emperor was doing.  Fishing suggested a retreat to nature, an escape from the politics of the day.  It was a kind of symbol for disenchantment and noncooperation.

1. Although these, like all other publications, carried the inevitable propaganda, they did report advances in science and technology in the West, and these impressed Jin-ming enormously.  He was fascinated by photographs of lasers, Hovercraft, helicopters, electronics, and cars in these magazines, in addition to the glimpses he got of the West in the 'reference films."  He began to feel that school, the media, and adults in general could not be trusted when they said that the capitalist world was hell and China was paradise.

1. Everyone rushed in to see what had happened.  Jin-ming was terrified. Not because of the explosion, but because of my father, who was a very intimidating figure.  But my father did not hit Jin-ming, or even scold him.  He just looked at him hard for a while, then said he was already scared enough, and should go outside and take a walk.  Jin-ming was so relieved he could hardly keep from jumping up and down.  He never thought he would get off so easily.  After his walk, my father said he was not to do any more experiments without being supervised by an adult.  But he did not enforce this order for long, and soon Jin-ming was carrying on as before.

1. In their relationship with their children, my parents seemed to be concerned above all with two things.  One was our academic education. No matter how preoccupied they were with their jobs, they always went through our homework with us.  They were in constant touch with our teachers, and firmly established in our heads that our goal in life was academic excellence.  Their involvement in our studies increased after the famine, when they had more spare time.  Most evenings, they took turns giving us extra lessons.  My mother was our math teacher, and my father tutored us in Chinese language and literature.  These evenings were solemn occasions for us, when we were allowed to read my father's books in his study, which was lined from floor to ceiling with thick hardbacks and thread-bound Chinese classics.  We had to wash our hands before we turned the leaves of his books.  We read Lu Xun, the great modern Chinese writer, and poems from the golden ages of Chinese poetry, which were considered difficult even for adults.  My parents' attention to our studies was matched only by their concern for our education in ethics.  My father wanted us to grow up to be honorable and principled citizens, which was what he believed the Communist revolution was all about. 

1. Throughout China's history there was a tradition of officials' children being arrogant and abusing their privileges.  This caused widespread resentment. 

1.  The cult of Mao and the cult of Lei Feng were two sides of the same coin: one was the cult of personality; the other, its essential corollary, was the cult of impersonality.

1. In China, there was a strong tradition of using historical allusion to voice opposition, and even apparently esoteric allusions were widely understood as coded references to the present day.  In April 1963 Mao banned all "Ghost Dramas," a genre rich in ancient tales of revenge by dead victims' spirits on those who had persecuted them.  To him, these ghost avengers were uncomfortably close to the class enemies who had perished under his rule.  The Maos also turned their attention to another genre, the "Dramas of the Ming Mandarin," the protagonist of which was Hai Rui, a mandarin from the Ming dynasty (1368-1644).  A famous personification of justice and courage, the Ming Mandarin remonstrated with the emperor on behalf of the suffering ordinary people, at the risk of his own life.  He was dismissed and exiled.  The Maos suspected that the Ming Mandarin was being used to represent Marshal Peng Dehuai, the former defense minister who in 1959 had spoken out against Mao's disastrous policies which had caused the famine.  

1. Mao felt threatened.  He saw himself as a Stalin figure,about to be denounced by a Khrushchev while he was still alive.  He wanted to make a preemptive strike and destroy the man he regarded as "China's Khrushchev," Liu Shaoqi, and his colleague Deng, as well as their followers in the Party.  This he deceptively termed the "Cultural Revolution."  He knew his would be a lone battle, but this gave him the majestic satisfaction of feeling that he was challenging nothing less than the whole world, and maneuvering on a grand scale.  There was even a tinge of self-pity as he portrayed himself as the tragic hero taking on a mighty enemy the huge Party machine.

1. Meanwhile, Mao made his single most important organizational move: he set up his own personal chain of command that operated outside the Party apparatus, although by formally claiming it was under the Politburo and the Central Committee he was able to pretend it was acting on Party orders.  First, he picked as his deputy Marshal Lin Biao, who had succeeded Peng Dehuai as defense minister in 1959 and had greatly boosted Mao's personality cult in the armed forces.  He also set up a new body, the Cultural Revolution Authority, under his former secretary Chen Boda, with his intelligence chief Kang Sheng and Mme Mao as its de facto leaders.  It became the core of the leadership of the Cultural Revolution.  Next, Mao moved in on the media, primarily the People's Daily, which carried the most authority as it was the official Party newspaper and the population had become accustomed to it being the voice of the regime.  He appointed Chen Boda to take it over on 31 May, thus securing a channel through which he could speak directly to hundreds of millions of Chinese.

1. There were pages of worshipping comments from foreigners, and pictures of European crowds trying to grab Mao's works.  Chinese national pride was being mobilized to enhance his cult.  The daily newspaper reading soon gave way to the recitation and memorizing of The Quotations of Chairman Mao, which were collected together in a pocket-size book with a red plastic cover, known as "The Little Red Book."  Everyone was given a copy and told to cherish it 'like our eyes." Every day we chanted passages from it over and over again in unison.  I still remember many verbatim.

1. For a Party member like Mr. Kan to commit suicide was regarded as a betrayal.  It was seen as a loss of faith in the Party and an attempt at blackmail.  Therefore, no mercy should be shown to the unfortunate person.  But the work team was nervous.  They knew very well that they had been inventing victims without the slightest justification.

1. To arouse the young to controlled mob violence, victims were necessary. The most conspicuous targets in any school were the teachers, some of whom had already been victimized by work teams and school authorities in the last few months.  Now the rebellious children set upon them.  Teachers were better targets than parents, who could only have been attacked in an atomized and isolated manner.  They were also more important figures of authority than parents in Chinese culture.  In practically every school in China, teachers were abused and beaten, sometimes fatally.  Some schoolchildren set up prisons in which teachers were tortured.

1. Lin Biao appeared in public as Mao's deputy and spokesman for the first time.  He made a speech calling on the Red Guards to charge out of their schools and 'smash up the four olds' defined as 'old ideas, old culture, old customs, and old habits." Following this obscure call, Red Guards all over China took to the streets, giving full vent to their vandalism, ignorance, and fanaticism.  They raided people's houses, smashed their antiques, tore up paintings and works of calligraphy.  Bonfires were lit to consume books.  Very soon nearly all treasures in private collections were destroyed.  Many writers and artists committed suicide after being cruelly beaten and humiliated, and being forced to witness their work being burned to ashes.  Museums were raided.  Palaces, temples, ancient tombs, statues, pagodas, city walls anything 'old' was pillaged.  The few things that survived, such as the Forbidden City, did so only because Premier Zhou Enlai sent the army to guard them, and issued specific orders that they should be protected. The Red Guards only pressed on when they were encouraged.  Mao hailed the Red Guards' actions as "Very good indeed!"  and ordered the nation to support them.  He encouraged the Red Guards to pick on a wider range of victims in order to increase the terror. 

1. My parents did not tell me about a conversation they had had some evenings before.  They had been sitting by an open window, outside which a loudspeaker tied to a street lamp was blasting out endless quotations of Mao's, particularly one about all revolutions being violent by definition - 'the savage tumult of one class overthrowing another."  The quotations were chanted again and again in a high pitched shriek that roused fear and, for some, excitement.  Every now and then there were announcements of 'victories' achieved by Red Guards: they had raided more homes of 'class enemies' and 'smashed their dogs' heads." My father had been looking out at the blazing sunset.  He turned to my mother and said slowly: "I don't understand the Cultural Revolution.  But I am certain that what is happening is terribly wrong.  This revolution cannot be justified by any Marxist or Communist principles.  People have lost their basic rights and protection.  This is unspeakable.  I am a Communist, and I have a duty to stop a worse disaster.  I must write to the Party leadership, to Chairman Mao."

1. In China there was virtually no channel through which people could voice a grievance, or influence policy, except appealing to the leaders.  In this particular case, only Mao could change the situation. Whatever Father thought, or guessed, about Mao's role, the only thing he could do was to petition him.

1. My father said thoughtfully, as though he were trying to persuade himself, "Every man loves his children.  You know that before a tiger is about to jump and kill, he always looks back and makes sure that his cub is all right.  Even a man-eating beast feels that way, let alone a human being. But a Communist has to be more than that.  He has to think about other children.  What about the children of the victims?"

1. My mother was worried that if she returned to Sichuan the authorities there might arrest her, seize the letter and not release my father. She felt that, on balance, her best bet was to stay in Peking, where she could continue to exercise pressure.

1. So our Great Leader's parents had been rich peasants!  But rich peasants were class enemies!  Why were Chairman Mao's parents heroes when other class enemies were objects of hate? The question frightened me so much that I immediately suppressed it.

1. Before our 'company' set off, at a wink from the officer, Plumpie stood up and proposed a search.  I could see that some of the others thought she was wasting our time, but our company commander cheerfully seconded her proposal. He suggested we search him first.  A boy was called to do this, and found a big bunch of keys on him.  Our commander acted as though he had been genuinely careless, and gave Plumpie a victorious smile.  The rest of us searched each other.  This roundabout way of doing things reflected a Maoist practice: things had to look as though they were the wish of the people, rather than commands from above. Hypocrisy and play acting were taken for granted.

1. "Where there is a will to condemn, there is evidence," as the Chinese saying has it.  On this basis, all unit leaders across China, big and small, were summarily denounced by people under them as capitalist-roaders for implementing policies that were alleged to be 'capitalist' and anti Chairman Mao."  These included allowing free markets in the countryside, advocating better professional skills for workers, permitting relative literary and artistic freedom, and encouraging competitiveness in sports now termed 'bourgeois cups-and-medals mania."  Until now most officials had had no idea that Mao had disliked these policies after all, the directives had all come from the Party, which was led by him.  Now they were told, out of the blue, that all these policies had come from the 'bourgeois headquarters' within the Party.

1. One major target of the Rebels was the professional elite in every unit, not only prominent doctors, artists, writers, and scientists, but also engineers and graded workers, even model night-soil collectors (people who collect human waste, which was extremely valuable to the peasants).  They were accused of having been promoted by Capitalist roaders, but were really the object of their colleagues' jealousy.  Other personal scores were also settled in the name of the revolution.

1. At one meeting, all the targets were ordered to kneel and kowtow to a huge portrait of Mao at the back of the platform.  While the others did as they were told, my father refused.  He said that kneeling and kowtowing were undignified feudal practices which the Communists were committed to eliminating.  The Rebels screamed, kicked his knees, and struck him on the head, but he still struggled to stand upright.  "I will not kneel!  I will not kowtow” he said furiously.  The enraged crowd demanded, "Bow your head and admit your crimes!"  He replied, "I have committed no crime.  I will not bend my head!" Several large young men jumped on him to try to force him down, but as soon as they let go he stood up straight, raised his head, and stared defiantly at the audience.  His assailants yanked his hair and pulled his neck.  My father struggled fiercely.  As the hysterical crowd screamed that he was 'anti-Cultural Revolution," he shouted angrily, "What kind of Cultural Revolution is this?  There is nothing "cultural" about it!  There is only brutality!" The men who were beating him howled, "The Cultural Revolution is led by Chairman Mao!  How dare you oppose it?"  My father raised his voice higher: "I do oppose it, even if it is led by Chairman Mao!"

1. It was from this time that I developed my way of judging the Chinese by dividing them into two kinds: one humane, and one not.  It took an upheaval like the Cultural Revolution to bring out these characteristics in people, whether they were teenage Red Guards, adult Rebels, or capitalist roaders.

1. They verbally attacked each other with Mao's quotations, making cynical use of his guru-like elusiveness it was easy to select a quotation of Mao's to suit any situation, or even both sides of the same argument. Mao knew that his vapid 'philosophy' was boomeranging on him, but he could not intervene explicitly without losing his mystical remoteness.

1. What had happened was that while my father was in prison, his interrogators had constantly told him he would be deserted by his wife and family if he did not write his 'confession."  Insisting on confessions was a standard practice.  Forcing victims to admit their 'guilt' was vital in crushing their morale.  But my father said he had nothing to confess, and would not write anything.  His interrogators then told him that my mother had denounced him.  When he asked for her to be allowed to visit him, he was told she had been given permission, but had refused, to show that she was 'drawing a line' between herself and him. 

1. Somehow, I coaxed him away from the edge of the roof.  I grabbed his hand and led him onto the landing.  I was shaking. Something seemed to have touched him, and an almost normal expression replaced his usual blank indifference or the intense introspective rolling of his eyes.  He carried me downstairs to a sofa and even fetched a towel to wipe away my tears.  But the signs of normality were short-lived.  Before I had recovered from the shock, I had to scramble up and run because he raised his hand and was about to hit me.

1. Instead of allowing my father medical treatment, the Rebels found his insanity a source of entertainment.  A poster serial appeared every other day entitled "The Inside Story of Madman Chang."  Its authors, from my father's department, ridiculed and lavished sarcasm on my father.  The posters were pasted up in a prime site just outside the department, and drew large, appreciative crowds.  I forced myself to read them, although I was aware of the stares from other readers, many of whom knew who I was.  I heard them whispering to those who did not know my identity.  My heart would tremble with rage and unbearable pain for my father, but I knew that reports of my reactions would reach my father's persecutors.  I wanted to look calm, and to let them know that they could not demoralize us.  I had no fear or sense of humiliation, only contempt for them.

1. Despite the threat of beating, and his gratitude to these Rebels, my father would not go against his principles. 

1. For over a year, until the end of 1968, my father was in and out of detention, along with most of the former leading officials in the provincial government.  Our apartment was constantly raided and turned upside down.  Detention was now called "Mao Zedong Thought Study Courses."  The pressure in these 'courses' was such that many groveled to the Tings; some committed suicide.  But my father never gave in to the Tings' demands to work with them.  He would say later how much having a loving family had helped him.  Most of those who committed suicide did so after their families had disowned them.  We visited my father in detention whenever we were allowed, which was seldom, and surrounded him with affection whenever he was home for a fleeting stay.  The Tings knew that my father loved my mother very much, and tried to break him through her.  Intense pressure was put on her to denounce him.  She had many reasons to resent my father.  He had not invited her mother to their wedding.  He had let her walk hundreds of agonizing miles, and had not given her much sympathy in her crises.  In Yibin he had refused to let her go to a better hospital for a dangerous birth.  He had always given the Party and the revolution priority over her.  But my mother had understood and respected my father and had above all never ceased to love him.  She would particularly stand by him now that he was in trouble.  No amount of suffering could bring her to denounce him.  My mother's own department turned a deaf ear to the Tings' orders to torment her, but Mrs. Shau's group was happy to oblige, and so were some other organizations which had nothing to do with her.  Altogether, she had to go through about a hundred denunciation meetings.  Once she was taken to a rally of tens of thousands of people in the People's Park in the center of Chengdu to be denounced.  Most of the participants had no idea who she was.  She was not nearly important enough to merit such a mass event.

1. Human anguish did not concern Mao.  People existed only to help him realize his strategic plans.  But his purpose was not genocide, and my family, like many other victims, were not deliberately starved.  My parents still received their salaries every month in spite of the fact that not only were they doing no work, they were also being denounced and tormented.  The main compound canteen was working normally to enable the Rebels to carry on with their 'revolution," and we, like the families of other capitalist-roaders, were fed.  We also got the same rations from the state as everyone else in the cities.  Much of the urban population was kept 'on hold' for the revolution. Mao wanted the population to fight, but to live.  He protected the extremely capable premier, Zhou Enlai, so that he could keep the economy going.  He knew he needed another first-class administrator in reserve in case anything happened to Zhou, so he kept Deng Xiaoping in relative security.  The country was not allowed to collapse totally.

1. We grew up fast.  We had no rival ties no squabbles, and no resentment of each other, none of the usual problems or pleasures of teenagers. The Cultural Revolution destroyed normal adolescence, with all its pitfalls, and threw us straight into sensible adulthood in our early teens.

1. I had always been told, and had believed, that I was living in a paradise on earth, socialist China, whereas the capitalist world was hell.  Now I asked myself."  If this is paradise, what then is hell?  I decided that I would like to see for myself whether there was indeed a place more full of pain.  For the first time, I consciously hated the regime I lived under, and craved an alternative.

1. Collecting of any kind, including stamps and paintings, had been banned as a 'bourgeois habit."  So people's instinct for collecting turned to this sanctioned object although they could only deal in it clandestinely.  Jin-ming made a small fortune.  Litfie did the Great Helmsman know that even the image of his head had become a piece of property for capitalist speculation, the very activity he had tried so hard to stamp out.

1. Theft was extremely widespread during the Cultural Revolution, particularly pick pocketing and stealing bicycles.  Most people I knew had their pockets picked at least once.  For me, shopping trips often involved either losing my own purse or seeing someone yelling because their purse had been stolen.  The police, who had split into factions, exercised only token surveillance.  When foreigners first came to China in large numbers in the 1970s, many were impressed by the 'moral cleanliness' of the society: a discarded sock would follow its owner a thousand miles from Peking to Guangzhou, cleaned and folded and placed in his hotel room.  The visitors did not realize that only foreigners and Chinese under close surveillance received such attention, or that no one would dare to steal from foreigners, because taking even a handkerchief was likely to be punished by death.  The clean folded sock bore no relation to the real state of society: it was just part of the regime's theater.

1. There were no state regulations about hairstyles or clothes. It was what everyone else was wearing that determined the rules of the day.  And because the range was so narrow, people were always looking out for the tiniest variations.  It was a real test of ingenuity to look different and attractive, and yet similar enough to every body else so that nobody with an accusing finger could pinpoint what exactly was heretical.

1. I have often dreamed of my grandmother since, and awakened sobbing.  She was a great character vivacious, talented, and immensely capable.  Yet she had no outlet for her abilities.  The daughter of an ambitious small-town policeman, concubine to a warlord, stepmother to an extended but divided family, and mother and mother-inlaw to two Communist officials in all these circumstances she had little happiness.  The days with Dr.  Xia were lived under the shadow of their past, and together they endured poverty, Japanese occupation, and the civil war. She might have found happiness in looking after her grandchildren, but she was rarely free from anxiety about us.  Most of her life she had lived in fear, and she faced death many times.  She was a strong woman, but in the end the disasters which hit my parents, the worries about her grandchildren, the tide of ugly human hostility all conspired to crush her.  But the most unbearable thing for her was what happened to her daughter.  It was as though she felt in her own body and soul every bit of the pain that my mother suffered, and she was finally killed by the accumulation of anguish.  There was another, more immediate factor in her death: she was denied proper medical care and could not be looked after, or even seen, by her daughter when she was fatally ill.  Because of the Cultural Revolution.  How could the revolution be good, I asked myself, when it brought such human destruction, for nothing?  Over and over again, I told myself I hated the Cultural Revolution, and I felt even worse because there was nothing I could do.

1. The Cultural Revolution not only did nothing to modernize the medieval elements in China's culture, it actually gave them political respectability.  "Modern' dictatorship and ancient intolerance fed on each other.  Any one who fell foul of the age-old conservative attitude, could now become a political victim.

1. After the famine, he was blamed for all the wrongs in the village.  The commune allowed the villagers to vote him out of office, and labeled him a 'class enemy." Like most class enemies, he was not put in prison but kept 'under surveillance' by his fellow villagers.  This was Mao's way: to keep 'enemy' figures among the people so they always had someone visible and at hand to hate. Whenever a new campaign came along, this man would be one of the 'usual suspects' to be rounded up and attacked atYesh.  He was always assigned the hardest jobs, and was allocated only seven work points a day, three fewer than most of the other men.  I never saw anyone talking to him. Several times I spotted village children throwing stones at his sons.

1. The virtual absence of any chance of a better future and the near total immobility for anyone born a peasant took the incentive out of the pursuit of knowledge.  Children of school age would stay at home to help their families with their work or look after younger brothers and sisters.  They would be out in the fields when they were barely in their teens.  As for girls, the peasants considered it a complete waste of time for them to go to school.  "They get married and belong to other people.  It's like pouring water on the ground."

1. one single slip has caused a thousand years of sorrow.

1. I devoured what had survived the burning of my father's library.  There were the complete works of Lu Xun, the great Chinese writer of the 1920s and 1930s.  Because he died in 1936, before the Communists came to power, he escaped being persecuted by Mao, and even became a great hero of his whereas Lu Xun's favorite pupil and closest associate, Hu Feng, was personally named by Mao as a counter revolutionary, and was imprisoned for decades.  It was the persecution of Hu Feng that led to the witch-hunt in which my mother was detained in 1955.

1. Lu Xun had been my father's great favorite.  When I was a child, he often read us essays by Lu.  I had not understood them at the time, even with my father's explanations, but now I was engrossed.  I found that their satirical edge could be applied to the Communists as well as to the Kuomintang.  Lu Xun had no ideology, only enlightened humanitarianism.  His skeptical genius challenged all assumptions.  He was another whose free intelligence helped liberate me from my indoctrination.

1. I was not very popular in the village, although the peasants largely left me alone.  They disapproved of me for failing to work as hard as they thought I should.  Work was their whole life, and the major criterion by which they judged anyone.  Their eye for hard work was both uncompromising and fair, and it was clear to them that I hated physical labor and took every opportunity to stay at home and read my books. The stomach trouble and skin rash I had suffered in Ningnan hit me again as soon as I came to Deyang.  Virtually every day I had some sort of diarrhea, and my legs broke out in infected sores.  I constantly felt weak and dizzy, but it was no good complaining to the peasants; their harsh life had made them regard all non fatal illnesses as trivial.

1. Because the Chinese tradition permitted little physical contact between fathers and daughters, he told me how happy he was through his eyes. They were so full of love and tenderness.  In them I also saw traces of the ordeal he had been going through.  His youthful energy and spark had given way to an air of aged confusion with a hint of quiet determination.  Yet he was still in his prime, only forty-eight years old.  A lump rose in my throat.  I searched his eyes for signs of my worst fear, the return of his insanity.  But he looked all right.  A heavy load lifted from my heart.

1. My family became closer as time went by.  My brother Xiao-her, who had been beaten by my father when he was a child, now came to love him.  On his first visit to the camp, he and my father had to sleep on a single bed because the camp leaders were jealous that my father had so much family company. 

1. Mao had sanctioned the mass rehabilitation not because he had at last come to his senses, but because, with the death of Lin Biao and the inevitable purge of his men, Mao had lost the hand with which he had controlled the army.  He had removed and alienated virtually all the other marshals, who opposed the Cultural Revolution, and had had to rely almost solely on Lin.  He had put his wife, relatives, and stars of the Cultural Revolution in important army posts, but these people had no military record, and therefore received no allegiance from the army.  With Lin gone, Mao had to turn to those purged leaders who still commanded the loyalty of the army, including Deng Xiaoping, who was soon to reemerge.  The first concession Mao had to make was to bring back most of the denounced officials.  Mao also knew that his power depended on a functioning economy.  His Revolutionary Committees were hopelessly divided and second-rate, and could not get the country moving.  He had no choice but to turn to the old, disgraced officials again.

1. During the four months of our acquaintance, the word 'love' had never been mentioned by either of us.  I had even suppressed it in my mind. One could never let oneself go, because consideration of the vital factor, family background, was ingrained in one's mind.  The consequences of being tied to the family of a 'class enemy' like Day's were too serious.  Because of the subconscious self-censorship, I never quite fell in love with Day.

1. His first words to her were, "You shouldn't have just brought me material goods.  You should have brought me spiritual food [meaning Mao's works]."  Tung had been reading nothing but these during his five years in solitary.  I was staying with his family at the time, and saw him making them study Mao's articles every day, with a seriousness which I found more tragic than ridiculous.

1. The increased availability of information from abroad was, of course, part of the general liberalization after the downfall of Lin Biao, but Nixon's visit gave it a convenient pretext the Chinese must not lose face by showing themselves to be totally ignorant of America.  In those days, every step in the process of relaxation had to be given some farfetched political justification.  Learning English was now a worthy cause for 'winning friends from all over the world' and was therefore no longer a crime.  So as not to alarm or frighten our distinguished guest, streets and restaurants lost the militant names that had been imposed on them at the beginning of the Cultural Revolution by the Red Guards.  In Chengdu, although it was not visited by Nixon, the restaurant The Whiff of Gunpowder switched back to its old name, The Fragrance of Sweet Wind.

1. On the hospital grounds we sat on the edge of a low stone bridge to rest.  My father looked in torment.  Eventually he said, "Would you forgive me?  I really find it very difficult to do this .... For a second I felt a surge of resentment, and wanted to cry out at him that there was no fairer alternative.  I wanted to tell him how much I had dreamed of going to the university, and that I deserved it for my hard work, for my exam results, and because I had been elected.  But I knew my father knew all this.  And it was he who had given me my thirst for knowledge.  Still, he had his principles, and because I loved him I had to accept him as he was, and understand his dilemma of being a moral man living in a land which was a moral void.  I held back my tears and said, "Of course."  We trudged back home in silence.  How lucky I was to have my resourceful mother!  She went to the wife of the head of the Enrollment Committee, who then spoke to her husband. My mother also went to see the other chiefs, and got them to back me. She emphasized my exam results, which she knew would be the clincher for these former capitalist-roaders.  In October 1973, I entered the Foreign Languages Department of Sichuan University in Chengdu to study English.

1. Meanwhile, Mme Mao and her cohorts were renewing their efforts to prevent the country from working.  In industry, their slogan was: "To stop production is revolution itself."  In agriculture, in which they now began to meddle seriously: "We would rather have socialist weeds than capitalist crops."  Acquiring foreign technology became 'sniffing after foreigners' farts and calling them sweet."  In education: "We want illiterate working people, not educated spiritual aristocrats." They called for schoolchildren to rebel against their teachers again; in January 1974, classroom windows, tables, and chairs in schools in Peking were smashed, as in 1966.  Mme Mao claimed this was like 'the revolutionary action of English workers destroying machines in the eighteenth century."  All this demagoguery' had one purpose: to create trouble for Zhou Enlai and Deng Xiaoping and generate chaos.  It was only in persecuting people and in destruction that Mme Mao and the other luminaries of the Cultural Revolution had a chance to 'shine."  In construction they had no place.

1. "Why do we attack the Kuomintang for allowing signs saying "No Chinese or Dogs" aren't we doing the same.'

1. For days I wept in silence.  I thought of my father's life, his wasted dedication and crushed dreams.  He need not have died.  Yet his death seemed so inevitable.  There was no place for him in Mao's China, because he had tried to be an honest man.  He had been betrayed by something to which he had given his whole life, and the betrayal had destroyed him.

1. I thought how we were like the frogs at the bottom of the well in the Chinese legend, who claimed that the sky was only as big as the round opening at the top of their well.  I felt an intense and urgent desire to see the world.

1. As I left China farther and farther behind, I looked out of the window and saw a great universe beyond the plane's silver wing.  I took one more glance over my past life, then turned to the future.  I was eager to embrace the world.

